so at the end of April this year I was
honored to be invited to Wolfson College
in Oxford to document a series of
informal presentations and conversations
concerning the role of probability in
physics
this so-called unconference was
sponsored by the Utopia Foundation
perhaps the most polarizing issue to
emerge over the course of the
discussions was the many worlds
interpretation of quantum mechanics
which seemed to pitch some of the more
practically minded experimental
physicists like Marcus Aunt from the
University of Vienna against those big
picture theoretical physicists like
David Deutsch from Oxford who were more
willing to embrace this Grand View of
ever branching parallel universes
so for the sake of this video I asked
Marcus and David if they wouldn't mind
hashing out their differences over their
lunch break in one of the corridors at
Wilson and that began by asking Marcus
how he conceived of the tensions here
the fundamental problem that we all try
to solve is why is there this unitary
evolution of quantum mechanics which
seems to explain everything very
naturally and all of a sudden during a
measurement this this Evolution has to
be reduced collapsed in the Copenhagen
interpretation and that's I think
something that David doesn't like he
wants to have everything in the same
same mathematical formalism but if you
follow it through it leads to
realities which seem to multiply and
then my question to you is
what is really the meaning of reality to
you because
um
well I experience only my single reality
here yes you you put it in terms of how
do we make sense of uh the unitary
Evolution compared with what we see at a
measurement and so on I I would want to
start before that I think we we want to
understand the world we want to
understand how the world is and uh that
that is not necessarily what we perceive
our our perceptions are at the end of a
long chain of of uh physical processes
of which themselves we only have
scientific uh knowledge or indirect
knowledge so I would start with the
question
how do we explain
Quantum phenomena like interference
uh not how do we make sense of quantum
theory which gives the right prediction
but first before that how do we explain
Quantum phenomena so there's there's an
interference process and we have a
interference pattern which we can see
without uh any
um quantum mechanics that the the result
of the experiment cannot be explained by
the events that we see now this is not
very unusual this happens a lot you know
in physics and ultimately every
observation is made very indirectly so
we have to infer things that that are
not there although it infer is the wrong
word we have to
conjecture explanations
so uh that's where I would start but
what makes you then certain that um
there must be a parallel world in that
sense or many infinitely many parallel
worlds instead of either some hidden
variables although yes of course there's
an experimentalist I know that some
kinds of invariables have certainly been
ruled out and do we need the notion of
reality more than the notion of
information is so to say the the many
worlds thing and information world or a
reality world in the thingy sense yes so
I uh that's a very interesting point
about the relationship of information to
reality because many people think that
the concept of information is somehow
prior to physics that the laws of
information are like mathematical
theorems they must be so
um whereas I tend to the view that that
what information does and what it can do
in the world is determined by physics
and therefore uh in regard to physics
physics is a theory of the world of of
the reality of the world not about the
information
there is this view that that quantum
mechanics only tells us what we will see
and it's silent about everything as
everything else is is just a
mathematical formalism but I think that
that's ultimately leads to solipsism and
it is no good philosophically but it's
even more important maybe for a
physicist it's no good for finding out
what the next Theory will be if if you
if you just think a theory is is is
predictions of experiments then we would
never have got from Kepler's Theory to
Newton's theorem from Newton's Theory to
Einsteins because they differ from each
other in what in in predictive terms is
a tiny amount but in explanatory terms
it's an enormous amount changes our
whole view of the universe but in terms
of predictions uh coming back to the
many worlds and the predictive power of
the many worlds
um I'm sitting here I can only probe my
local world even within my local world I
seem to experience all these funny
quantum superpositions
where you would probably say another
part of the Multiverse branding into me
again or into my world again but but
this this process is kind of
experimentally at least at the moment
very difficult to access and the
question is do you have a good proposal
how to do it yes so
I mentioned interference experiments so
interference in an interference
experiment we don't it even with this
notion of uh Seeing Things by through
the explanation we only see that the
let's say the photon exists in two
instances
rather than rather than that the whole
world does and when you talk about your
experience
at the moment as you say we can only
probe whether
an experimental outcome is caused by a
single history or by multiple histories
of an atom a molecule I mean you you in
in your talks you you get a wonderful
example of very large objects from from
an atomic point of view exhibiting
interference of existing in more than
one instance
uh when we have quantum computers
we will be able to have very large very
complex entities existing in
superpositions so in principle I
suggested a long ago before this was uh
remotely uh on the cards experimentally
that if we had a quantum computer on
which
an artificial intelligence program was
running as a human level artificial
intelligence then this entity would be
able to experience
interference in its own uh in
Consciousness well some people would say
that your Consciousness would collapse
your reality yeah so if that happened
that would refute the average
interpretation that uh or as I would say
it would refute quantum theory
um and uh that that would be a very
interesting problem and that's one of
the reasons why scaling up both the size
and the complexity and the mass of
phenomena that are experimentally
observed but can only be explained by
quantum theory is very important yeah I
fully agreed because we need to do that
um and we just need to close the gap
between that and the AI because the AI
would not be having this conversation or
at least the AI would not be able to
make the argument that you just made it
it would have to say I've only got
evidence of many worlds on the scale of
my mind but not bigger
so and I guess that will always be true
yeah but there's something in in um in
the formulation of phrasing of those
sentences where I'm getting also
doubtful it is when I talk about these
things about superpositions I always
make these quote unquote uh when I say a
particle is at the same time here and
there
um because there are two words that I
don't understand three words that I
don't understand uh first the word is so
reality is the second what does time
really mean and the third one what does
space really mean and we don't have any
experimental evidence that the particle
is at the same time here and there we
just have a physical description the
quantum mechanical description that the
wave function behaves as if
and how can we make the step to the
miniverse then I think we have something
slightly more than that again you come
from the theory from we are but but I
think prior to the theory we have the
experience that this thing cannot be
explained by single trajectories
definitely somebody you know we don't
have to believe quantum mechanics to to
to see that so we rule out single
trajectory uh explanations
and that we have before we have Quantum
organic if we didn't have quantum
mechanics it would be a mystery we would
say that it simply is no explanation
well hypothetically could this maybe be
explained by
some very weird folding of space-time in
this case so not really making another
Multiverse or another brand of the
Multiverse but really a new 3D or 4D
space time or another 11 space time
could that jump through a shortcuts
through another higher Dimension so to
say from an end to the other yes is the
answer
calling the Multiverse many universes is
a bit of a misnomer because the whole
point of it is interference and but many
Universe parallel universes would
indicate
separate universes and that these all
these universities our universe splits
into two every time a Quantum event
happens whereas actually it's only the
it's only the electron or the photon or
something that's splitting now if this
can be explained
in another way than by quantum theory
then another thing we know
from just you know without Theory with
with just
Elementary reasoning about the
experiments is that this other thing has
to be immensely complicated it's sort of
two to the power of the complexity of
what we see and again when we have fully
fledged quantum computers we will have
computations going on Whose results
cannot be explained by any
history of the computer that has it
single valued so uh when when that
number is greater than the number of
atoms in the universe which will easily
be attained as soon as we have quantum
computers so yes there could be another
explanation in terms of folded universes
or other dimensions or or what but those
things would have to be as complicated
as the many universes and as some people
were saying that the other ever a
conference
these things would contain
other that they would contain other
instances of people or they would they
all they would contain things whose
shapes were the other instances of
people and so on and other instances of
the quantum computer which would be
interacting with our instance and so on
so
it's really a matter of terminology then
whether you whether you call that a
Multiverse or parallel universes or a
much higher dimensional reality than
In classical Concepts
um and in in your Multiverse concept
um
whether again zillions of branches and
hypothetically you could also be here
and in this other part of the branch of
the Multiverse it could be in a
different different place different time
different internal State yeah what does
that tell us about your identity does
that affect anything about how you feel
as a human so to say um
it it certainly has to be taken into
account but it's logically it's the same
issue as
am I the same person that I was 10 years
ago or that I will be in 10 years time
if we go back to when I was a baby I I
certainly was not the same person as I
am today there is a continuity between
uh me then and me now but that doesn't
mean I'm the same person because a choir
person I have changed
drastically and so but the relationship
between the past and the present is one
kind of thing the relationship between
the present and future is a different
uh One Branch in Everett branch and
another is a different kind of thing but
in all cases what what makes us say that
those things are real is the
explanations that we have for Here and
Now
although other scientists would say shut
up and measure calculate actually but
um just don't talk about things that you
cannot see and the men the other part of
the near the branches you don't see so
why do you dare not to shut up yes well
first of all I think that that
um that attitude involves saying that
there are certain questions about
reality that you're not allowed to ask
you're you're allowed to ask how the
experiment was prepared you're allowed
to ask what will the results be you're
not allowed to ask how were the results
brought abound by the preparation so
that's what so therefore it's not an
explanation in my terms but uh and as
for shut up
um
that's really uh another way of of
trying to evade the consequences in
terms of reality like like my favorite
example is of of dinosaurs in the past
so there are people who say nobody ever
saw a dinosaur nobody ever will and
therefore it's just a frivolity to say
that they really exist at most we can
say fossils behave as though dinosaurs
existed but no paleontologist would
accept talking that way even though
there is no experimental way of
disproving that that manner of speaking
so and that's because paleontologists
are only interested in paleontology
because they want to know what really
happened not they're not you know if
they were if they were interested in
fossils they would be geologists